I thought the king had moreaffected
the Duke of Albany thanCornwall.
It did always seem so to us.
But now, in the division of thekingdom,
it appears not which of thedukes he values most,
for equalities are so weighedthat curiosity in neither
can make choice of either'smoiety.
Is not this your son, my lord?
His breeding, sir, hath been atmy charge.
I have so often blushed toacknowledge him
that now I am brazed to it.
I cannot conceive you.
Sir, this young fellow's mothercould,
whereupon she grew round-wombedand had, indeed, sir,
a son for her cradle
ere she had a husband for herbed.
Do you smell a fault?
I cannot wish the fault undone,the issue of it being so proper.
But I have, sir, a son by orderof law,
some year elder than this,
who yet is no dearer in myaccount.
Though this knave came somethingsaucily into the world
before he was sent for, yet washis mother fair.
There was good sport at hismaking,
and the whoreson must beacknowledged.
Do you know this noblegentleman, Edmund?
No, my lord.
My lord of Kent.
Remember him hereafter as myhonorable friend.
My services to Your Lordship.
I must love you and sue to knowyou better.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
He hath been out nine years, andaway he shall again.
The king is coming.
Attend the lords of France andBurgundy, Gloucester.
I shall, my liege.
Meantime, we shall express ourdarker purpose.
Give me the map there.
Know that we have divided inthree our kingdom,
and 'tis our fast intent
to shake all care and businessfrom our age,
conferring them on youngerstrengths
while we unburdened crawl towarddeath.
Our son of Cornwall and you,
our no less loving son ofAlbany,
we have this hour a constantwill
to publish our daughters'several dowers
that future strife may beprevented now.
The princes France and Burgundy,
great rivals in our youngestdaughter's love,
long in our court have madetheir amorous sojourn
and here are to be answered.
Tell me, my daughtersó
since now we will divest us bothof rule,
interest of territory, cares ofstateó
which of you shall we say dothlove us most,
that we our largest bounty mayextend
where nature doth with meritchallenge?
Goneril, our eldest-born, speakfirst.
Sir, I love you more than wordcan wield the matter;
dearer than eyesight, space, andliberty;
beyond what can be valued richor rare;
no less than life, with grace,health, beauty, honor;
as much as child e'er loved orfather found;
a love that makes breath poorand speech unable;
beyond all manner of so much Ilove you.
What shall Cordelia speak?
Love and be silent.
Of all these bounds, even fromthis line to this,
with shadowy forests and withchampaigns riched
with plenteous rivers andwide-skirted meads,
we make thee lady.
To thine and Albany's issues bethis perpetual.
What says our second daughter,
our dearest Regan, wife ofCornwall?
Speak.
I am made of that self metal
as my sister, and prize me ather worth.
In my true heart, I find shenames my very deed of love;
only she comes too short
that I profess myself an enemyto all other joys,
which the most precious squareof sense possesses,
and find I am alone felicitatein your dear highness' love.
Then poor Cordelia.
And yet not so, since I am sure
my love's more ponderous than mytongue.
To thee and thine, hereditaryever,
remain this ample third of ourfair kingdomó
no less in space, validity, andpleasure
than that conferred on Goneril.
Now, our joy,
although our last, not least,
to whose young love
the vines of France and milk ofBurgundy
strive to be interested.
What can you say to win a thirdmore opulent than your sisters'?
Speak.
Nothing, my lord.
Nothing?
Nothing.
Nothing will come of nothing;speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannotheave my heart into my mouth.
I love Your Majesty according tomy bond,
no more nor less.
How, how, Cordelia!
Mend your speech a little, lestyou may mar your fortunes.
Good my lord, you have begot me,bred me, loved me.
I return those duties back asare right fit,
obey you, love you, and mosthonor you.
Why have my sisters husbands ifthey say they love you all?
Haply, when I shall wed, thatlord whose hand
must take my plight
shall carry half my love withhim,
half my care and duty.
Sure, I shall never marry likemy sisters,
to love my father all.
But goes thy heart with this?
Ay, my good lord.
So young and so untender?
So young, my lord, and true.
Let it be so.
Thy truth, then, be thy dower,
for, by the sacred radiance ofthe sun,
the mysteries of Hecate and thenight,
by all the operation of the orbs
from whom we do exist and ceaseto be,
here I disclaim all my paternalcare,
propinquity, and property ofblood
and, as a stranger to my heartand me,
hold thee, from this, forever.
The barbarous Scythian, or hethat makes his generation messes
to gorge his appetite, shall tomy bosom be
as well neighbored, pitied, andrelieved
as thou, my sometime daughter.
Good my liege
Peace, Kent!
Come not between the dragon andhis wrath.
I loved her most
and thought to set my rest onher kind nursery.
Hence, and avoid my sight!
So be my grave my peace,
as here I give her father'sheart from her.
Call France! Who stirs?
Call Burgundy.
Cornwall, Albany.
With my two daughters' dowers,digest this third.
Let pride, which she callsplainness, marry her.
I do invest you jointly with mypower, preeminence,
and all the large effects thattroop with majesty.
Ourself, by monthly course,
with reservation of an hundredknights,
by you to be sustained,
shall our abode make with you bydue turns.
Only we will retain the name andall the addition of a king.
The sway, revenue, execution ofthe rest,
beloved sons, be yours,
which, to confirm, this coronetpart between you.
Royal Lear, whom I have everhonored as my king,
loved as my father, as my masterfollowed,
as my great patron thought on inmy prayersó
The bow is bent and drawn; makefrom the shaft.
Let it fall rather,
though the fork invade theregion of my heart.
Be Kent unmannerly when Lear ismad?
What wouldst thou do, old man?
Think'st thou that duty shallhave dread to speak
when power to flattery bows?
To plainness honor's bound whenmajesty falls to folly.
Reserve thy state
and, in thy best consideration,check this hideous rashness.
Answer my life my judgment,
thy youngest daughter does notlove thee least.
Nor are those empty-hearted
whose low sounds reverb nohollowness.
Kent, on thy life, no more.
My life I never held but as apawn
to wage against thine enemiesnor fear to lose it,
thy safety being motive.
Out of my sight!
See better, Lear, and let mestill remain
the true blank of thine eye.
Now, by Apollo
Now, by Apollo, King, thouswear'st thy gods in vain!
O, vassal! Miscreant!
Dear sir, forbear.
Kill thy physician,
and the fee bestow upon thy fouldisease.
Revoke thy gift
or, whilst I can vent clamorfrom my throat,
I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
Hear me, recreant!
On thine allegiance, hear me!
Since thou hast sought to makeus break our vow,
which we durst never yet, and bystrained pride
to come betwixt our sentence andour power,
which nor our nature nor ourplace can bear,
our potency made good, take thyreward.
Five days we do allot thee forprovision
to shield thee from disasters ofthe world
and on the sixth to turn thyhated back
upon our kingdom.
If, on the tenth day following,
thy banished trunk be found inour dominions,
the moment is thy death.
Away!
By Jupiter, this shall not berevoked.
Fare thee well, King.
Sith thus thou wilt appear,
freedom lives hence, andbanishment is here.
The gods to their dear sheltertake thee, maid,
that justly think'st and hastmost rightly said.
And your large speeches may yourdeeds approve
that good effects may springfrom words of love.
Thus Kent, O princes, bids youall adieu.
He'll shape his old course in acountry new.
Here's France and Burgundy, mynoble lord.
My lord of Burgundy, we firstaddress toward you,
who, with this king, hathrivaled for our daughter.
What, in the least,
will you require in presentdower with her
or cease your quest of love?
Most Royal Majesty, I crave nomore
than hath your highness offered;nor will you tender less.
Right noble Burgundy, when shewas dear to us,
we did hold her so, but now herprice is fallen.
Sir, there she stands.
If aught within this littleseeming substance,
or all of it, with ourdispleasure pieced
and nothing more, may haply likeyour grace,
she's there, and she is yours.
I know no answer.
Will you, with these infirmitiesshe owes,
unfriended, new-adopted to ourhate,
dowered with our curse, andstrangered with our oath,
take her or leave her?
Pardon me, royal sir.
Election makes not up in suchconditions.
Then leave her, sir, for, by thepower that made me,
I tell you all her wealth.
For you, great king,
I would not from your love makesuch a stray
to match you where I hate.
Therefore beseech you
to avert your liking a moreworthier way
than on a wretch whom nature isashamed
almost to acknowledge hers.
This is most strange,
that she, whom even but now wasyour best object,
the argument of your praise,balm of your age,
the best, the dearest,
should in this trice of timecommit a thing so monstrous
to dismantle so many folds offavor.
Sure, her offense must be ofsuch unnatural degree
that monsters it,
or your fore-vouched affectionfall into taintó
which, to believe of her, mustbe a faith
that reason without miracleshould never plant in me.
I yet beseech Your Majesty.
If for I want that glib and oilyart,
to speak and purpose notó
since what I well intend, I'lldo it before I speakó
that you make known
it is no vicious blot, murder,or foulness,
no unchaste action or dishonoredstep
that hath deprived me of yourgrace and favor.
But even for want of that forwhich I am richer,
a still-soliciting eye
and such a tongue that I am gladI have not,
though not to have it hath lostme in your liking.
Better thou hadst not been born
than not to have pleased mebetter.
Is it but this, a tardiness innature,
that often leaves the historyunspoke
which it intends to do?
My lord of Burgundy, what sayyou to the lady?
Love's not love when 'tismingled with regards
that stand aloof from the entirepoint.
Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.
Royal Majesty,
give but that portion whichyourself proposed,
and here I take Cordelia by thehand,
Duchess of Burgundy.
Nothing.
I have sworn. I am firm.
I am sorry, then, you have solost a father
that you must lose a husband.
Peace be with Burgundy.
Since that respects of fortuneare his love,
I shall not be his wife.
Fairest Cordelia, that art mostrich, being poor;
most choice, forsaken; and mostloved, despised.
Thee and thy virtues here, Iseize upon.
Be it lawful, I take up what'scast away.
Gods, gods.
'Tis strange that from theircold'st neglect,
my love should kindle toinflamed respect.
Thy dowerless daughter, King,thrown to my chance,
is queen of us, of ours, of ourfair France.
Not all the dukes of waterishBurgundy
can buy this unprized preciousmaid of me.
Bid them farewell, Cordelia,though unkind.
Thou losest here a better whereto find.
Thou hast her, France.
Let her be thine, for we have nosuch daughter,
nor shall ever see that face ofhers again.
Therefore, be gone
without our grace, our love, ourbenison.
Come, noble Burgundy.
Bid farewell to your sisters.
The jewels of our father,
with washed eyes, Cordelialeaves you.
I know you what you are
and, like a sister, am mostloath
to call your faults as they arenamed.
Love well our father.
To your professed bosoms, Icommit him.
But yet, alas, stood I withinhis grace,
I would prefer him to a betterplace.
So farewell to you both.
Prescribe not us our duties.
Let your study be to contentyour lord,
who hath received you atfortune's alms.
You have obedience scanted
and well are worth the want thatyou have wanted.
Time shall unfold what plaitedcunning hides
who covers faults at last withshame derides.
Well may you prosper.
Come, my fair Cordelia.
Sister, it is not little I haveto say
of what most nearly appertainsto us both.
I think our father will hencetonight.
That is most certain, and withyou.
Next month, with us.
You see how full of changes hisage is.
The observation we have made onit hath not been little.
He always loved our sister best,
and with what poor judgment hehath now cast her off
appears too grossly.
'Tis the infirmity of his age.
Yet he hath ever but slenderlyknown himself.
The best and soundest of histime hath been but rash.
Then must we look from his age
to receive not alone theimperfections
of long-engraffed condition
but therewithal the unrulywaywardness
that infirm and choleric yearsbring with them.
Such unconstant starts are welikely to have of him
as this of Kent's banishment.
There is further compliment ofleave-taking
between France and him.
Pray you, let's hit together.
If our father carry authority
with such dispositions as hebears,
this last surrender of his willbut offend us.
We shall further think on it.
We must do something and in theheat.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess.
To thy law my services arebound.
Wherefore should I stand in theplague of custom
and permit the curiosity ofnations to deprive me,
for that I am some 12 or 14moon-shines
lag of a brother?
Why bastard?
Wherefore base
when my dimensions are as wellcompact,
my mind as generous, and myshape as true
as honest madam's issue?
Why brand they us with base,
with baseness, bastardy, base,base?
Who, in the lusty stealth ofnature,
take more composition and fiercequality than doth,
within a dull, stale, tired bed,
go to the creating a whole tribeof fops
got 'tween asleep and wake?
Well, then, legitimate Edgar, Imust have your land.
Our father's love
is to the bastard Edmund as tothe legitimate.
Fine word, "legitimate."
Well, my legitimate, if thisletter speed
and my invention thrive,
Edmund the base shall top thelegitimate.
I grow; I prosper.
Now, gods, stand up forbastards.
Kent banished thus.
And France in choler parted.
And the king gone tonight.
Subscribed his power. Confinedto exhibition.
All this done upon the gad.
Edmund, how now?
What news?
So please Your Lordship, none.
Why so earnestly seek you to putup that letter?
I know no news, my lord.
What paper were you reading?
Nothing, my lord.
No?
What needed, then,
that terrible dispatch of itinto your pocket?
The quality of nothing hath notsuch need to hide itself.
Let's see.
Come, if it be nothing, I shallnot need spectacles.
I beseech you, sir, pardon me.
It is a letter from my brotherthat I have not all o'er-read.
And for so much as I haveperused,
I find it not fit for youro'er-looking.
Give me the letter, sir.
I shall offend either to detainor give it.
The contents, as in part Iunderstand them,
are to blame.
Let's see. Let's see.
I hope, for my brother'sjustification,
he hath writ this
but as an essay or taste of myvirtue.
"This policy and reverence ofage
"makes the world bitter to thebest of our times,
"keeps our futures from us
"till our oldness cannot relishthem.
"I begin to find an idle andfond bondage
"in the oppression of agedtyranny,
"who sways, not as it hathpower,
"but as it is suffered.
"Come to me, that of this I mayspeak more.
"If our father should sleep tillI waked him,
"you should enjoy half hisrevenue forever
and live the beloved of yourbrother, Edgar."
Conspiracy?
"...sleep till I waked him,
"you should enjoy half hisrevenue"?
My son Edgar?
Had he a hand to write this,
a heart and brain to breed itin?
When came this to you?
Who brought it?
It was not brought me, my lord.
There's the cunning of it.
I found it thrown in at thecasement of my closet.
You know the character to beyour brother's?
If the matter were good, mylord,
I durst swear it were his.
But in respect of that, I wouldfain think it were not.
It is his.
It is his hand, my lord.
But I hope his heart is not inthe contents.
Has he never before sounded youin this business?
Never, my lord.
But I have heard him oftmaintain it to be fit
that sons at perfect age andfathers declined,
the father should be as ward tothe son
and the son manage his revenue.
O villain, villain!
His very opinion in the letter!
Abhorred villain!
Unnatural, detested, brutishvillain!
Worse than brutish!
Go, sirrah, seek him.
I'll apprehend him.
Abominable villain!
Where is he?
I do not well know, my lord.
If it shall please you tosuspend your indignation
against my brother
till you can derive bettertestimony of his intent,
you shall run a certain courseó
where, if you violently proceedagainst him,
mistaking his purpose,
it would make a great gap inyour own honor
and shake in pieces the heart ofhis obedience.
I dare pawn down my life forhim,
that he hath wrote this to feelmy affection to your honor
and to no other pretense ofdanger.
Think you so?
If your honor judge it meet, Iwill place you
where you shall hear us conferof this
and, by an auricular assurance,have your satisfaction,
and that with no greater delaythan this very evening.
He cannot be such a monster.
Nor is not, sure.
To his father, who so tenderlyand entirely loves him.
Heaven and Earth!
Seek him out, Edmund.
Wind me into him, I pray you.
Frame the business after yourown wisdom.
I would unstate myself to be ina due resolution.
I will seek him, sir, presently,
convey the business as I shallfind means,
and acquaint you withal.
These late eclipses in the Sunand moon portend no good to us.
Though the wisdom of nature canreason it thus and thus,
yet nature finds itself scourgedby the sequent effects.
Love cools, friendship fallsoff,
brothers divide.
In cities, mutinies; incountries, discord;
in palaces, treason.
And the bond cracked 'twixt sonand father.
This villain of mine comes underthe prediction;
there's son against father.
The king falls from bias ofnature;
there's father against child.
Oh.
We have seen the best of ourtime.
Machinations, hollowness,treachery,
and all ruinous disorders
follow us disquietly to ourgraves.
Find out this villain, Edmund.
It shall lose thee nothing.
Do it carefully.
And the noble and true-heartedKent banished.
His offense: honesty.
'Tis strange.
This is the excellent foppery ofthe world:
that when we are sick in fortune
often the surfeits of our ownbehavioró
we make guilty of our disasters
the Sun, the moon, and stars
as if we were villains onnecessity;
fools by heavenly compulsion;
knaves, thieves, and treachers,by spherical predominance;
drunkards, liars, and adulterers
by an enforced obedience ofplanetary influence;
and all that we are evil in by adivine thrusting on.
An admirable evasion ofwhoremaster man,
to lay his goatish dispositionon the charge of a star.
My father compounded with mymother
under the dragon's tail,
and my nativity was under Ursamajor,
so that it follows I am roughand lecherous.
I should have been that I am,
had the maidenliest star in thefirmament twinkled
on my bastardizing.
Edgar
Pat he comes like thecatastrophe of the old comedy.
My cue is villainous melancholy,
with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.
O, these eclipses do portendthese divisions.
How now, brother Edmund?
What serious contemplation areyou in?
I am thinking, brother,
of a prediction I read thisother day
what should follow theseeclipses.
Do you busy yourself with that?
I promise you, the effects hewrites of succeed unhappily,
as of unnaturalness between thechild and the parent;
death, dearth, dissolutions ofancient amities;
divisions in state;
menaces and maledictions againstking and nobles;
needless diffidences; banishmentof friends;
dissipation of cohorts; nuptialbreaches;
and I know not what.
How long have you been a sectaryastronomical?
Come, come.
When saw you my father last?
The night gone by.
Spake you with him?
Ay, two hours together.
Parted you in good terms?
Found you no displeasure in himby word nor countenance?
None at all.
Bethink yourself wherein you mayhave offended him.
And at my entreaty, forbear hispresence
until some little time hathqualified the heat
of his displeasure,
which, at this instant, sorageth in him
that with the mischief of yourperson,
it would scarcely allay.
Some villain hath done me wrong.
That's my fear.
I pray you, have a continentforbearance
till the speed of his rage goesslower.
And, as I say, retire with me tomy lodging,
from whence I will fitly bringyou to hear my lord speak.
Pray ye, go.
There's my key.
If you do stir abroad, go armed.
Armed, brother?
Brother, I advise you to thebest.
I am no honest man if there beany good meaning toward you.
I have told you what I have seenand heard,
but faintly nothing like theimage and horror of it.
Pray you, away.
Shall I hear from you anon?
I do serve you in this business.
A credulous father and a brothernoble,
whose nature is so far fromdoing harms
that he suspects none,
on whose foolish honesty mypractices ride easy.
I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, havelands by wit.
All with me's meet that I canfashion fit.
Did my father strike mygentleman
for chiding of his fool?
Aye, madam.
By day and night, he wrongs me.
Every hour, he flashes into onegross crime or other
that sets us all at odds.
I'll not endure it.
His knights grow riotous,
and himself upbraids us on everytrifle.
When he returns from hunting, Iwill not speak with him.
Say I am sick.
If you come slack of formerservices,
you shall do well.
The fault of it, I'll answer.
He's coming, madam; I hear him.
Put on what weary negligence youplease,
you and your fellows.
I'll have it come to question.
If he distaste it, let him to mysister,
whose mind and mine, I know, inthat are one,
not to be over-ruled.
Idle old man that still wouldmanage
those authorities that he hathgiven away.
Now, by my life, old fools arebabes again
and must be used with checks asflatteries
when they are seen abused.
Remember what I have said.
Well, madam.
And let his knights have colderlooks among you.
What grows of it, no matter.
Advise your fellows so.
I would breed from henceoccasions,
and I shall, that I may speak.
I'll write straight to my sister
to hold my very course.
Prepare for dinner.
If but as well I other accentsborrow
that can my speech defuse,
my good intent may carry throughitself
to that full issue for which Irazed my likeness.
Now, banished Kent,
if thou canst serve where thoudost stand condemned,
so may it come thy master, whomthou lovest,
shall find thee full of labors.
Let me not stay a jot fordinner.
Go, get it ready.
How now?
What art thou?
A man, sir.
What dost thou profess?
What wouldst thou with us?
I do profess to be no less thanI seem,
to serve him truly that will putme in trust,
to love him that is honest,
to converse with him that iswise and says little,
to fear judgment, to fight whenI cannot choose,
and to eat no fish.
What art thou?
A very honest-hearted fellow andas poor as the king.
If thou be as poor for a subjectas he is for a king,
thou art poor enough.
What wouldst thou?
Service.
Who wouldst thou serve?
You.
Dost thou know me, fellow?
No, sir; but you have that inyour countenance
that I would fain call master.
What's that?
Authority.
What services canst thou do?
I can keep honest counsel, ride,run,
mar a curious tale in tellingit,
and deliver a plain messagebluntly.
That which ordinary men are fitfor, I am qualified in.
And the best of me is diligence.
How old art thou?
Not so young, sir, to love awoman for singing,
nor so old to dote on her foranything.
I have years on my back 48.
Follow me; thou shalt serve me.
If I like thee no worse afterdinner,
I shall not part from theebefore.
Dinner, ho, dinner!
Where's my knave, my fool?
Go you, and call my fool hither.
You, you, sirrah, where's mydaughter?
So please you
What says the fellow there?
Call the clodpoll back!
Where's my fool, ho-ho-ho?
I think the world's asleep.
How now!
Where's that mongrel?
He says, my lord, your daughteris not well.
Why came not the slave back tome when I called him?
Sir, he answered me in theroundest manner
he would not.
He would not?
My lord, I know not what thematter is.
But to my judgment, yourhighness
is not entertained with thatceremonious affection
as you were wont.
There's a great abatement ofkindness appears as well
in the general dependents
as in the duke himself also andyour daughter.
Ha! Sayest thou so?
I beseech you, pardon me, mylord, if I be mistaken,
for my duty cannot be silent
when I think your highnesswronged.
Thou but rememberest me of mineown conception.
I have perceived a most faintneglect of late,
which I have rather blamed asmine own jealous curiosity
than as the very pretense andpurpose of unkindness.
I will look further into it.
But where's my fool?
I have not seen him this twodays.
Since my young lady's going intoFrance, sir,
the fool hath much pined away.
No more of that; I have noted itwell.
Go you; tell my daughter I wouldspeak with her.
Go you, and call hither my fool!
O, you sir, you!
Come you hither, sir.
Who am I, sir?
My lady's father.
"My lady's father."
My lord's knave.
You whoreson dog, you slave, youcur.
I am none of these, my lord; Ibeseech your pardon.
Do you bandy looks with me, yourascal?
I'll not be strucken, my lord.
Nor tripped neither, you basefootball player.
I thank thee, fellow.
Thou servest me, and I'll lovethee.
Come, sir. Arise, away.
No, we'll teach you differences.
Away, away.
Have you wisdom?
If you will measure yourlubber's length again, tarry.
But away.
Go to.
Now, my friendly knave, I thankthee.
Here's earnest for thy service.
Let me hire him too: here's mycoxcomb.
How now, my pretty knave?
How dost thou?
Sirrah, you were best take mycoxcomb.
Why, fool?
Why? For taking one's part thatout of favor.
Nay, and thou canst not smile asthe wind sits;
thou'lt catch cold shortly.
Here, take my coxcomb.
Why, this fellow, he hasbanished two on's daughters
and did the third a blessingagainst his will.
If thou follow him, thou mustneeds wear my coxcomb.
How now, nuncle!
Would I had two coxcombs and twodaughters!
Why, boy?
If I gave them all me living,I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
There's mine; beg another of thydaughters.
Take heed, sirrah; the whip.
Truth's a dog must to kennel.
He must be whipped out when Ladythe brach
may stand by the fire and stink.
A pestilent gall to me.
Sirrah, I'll teach thee aspeech.
Do, boy.
Mark it, nuncle.
Have more than thou showest,speak less than thou knowest,
lend less than thou owest, ridemore than thou goest,
learn more than thou trowest,set less than thou throwest;
leave thy drink and thy whore,and keep in-a-door,
and thou shalt have more thantwo tens to a score.
This is nothing, fool.
Then 'tis like the breath of anunfee'd lawyer;
you gave me nothing for it.
Can you make no use of nothing,nuncle?
Why, no, boy; nothing can bemade out of nothing.
Prithee, tell him.
So much the rent of his landcomes to.
He'll not believe a fool.
A bitter fool.
Dost know the difference, myboy,
between a bitter fool and asweet one?
No, lad; teach me.
That lord that counseled thee togive away thy land,
come place him here by me, anddo thou for him stand.
The sweet and bitter fool willpresently appear
the one in motley here, theother found out there.
Dost thou call me fool, boy?
All thy other titles thou hastgiven away
that thou wast born with.
This is not altogether fool, mylord.
No, faith, lords and great menwill not let me.
If I had a monopoly out, they'dhave part on it.
And the ladies too, they'll notlet me have all the fool tomyself;
they'd be snatching.
-Nuncle. -Huh?
Give me an egg, and I'll givethee two crowns.
What two crowns shall they be?
Why, when I've cut the egg inthe middle
and eat up the meat, the twocrowns of the egg.
When thou clovest thy crown inthe middle
and gavest away both parts,
thou borest thy ass on thy backo'er the dirt.
Thou hadst little wit in thybald crown
when thou gavest thy golden oneaway.
If I speak like meself in this,
let him be whipped that firstfinds it so.
Fools have ne'er less grace in ayear.
For wise men are grown foppish
and know not how their wits towear.
Their manners are so apish.
When wast thou wont to be sofull of song, sirrah?
I have used it, nuncle,
ever since thou mad'st thydaughters thy mothers.
For when thou gavest them therod
and putest down thine ownbreeches,
then they for sudden joy didweep
and I for sorrow sung
that such a king should playbo-peep
and go the fools among.
O nuncle, prithee, keep aschoolmaster
that could teach thy fool tolie.
I'd fain learn to lie.
And you lie, sirrah, we'll haveyou whipped.
I marvel what kin thou and thydaughters are.
They'd have me whipped forspeaking true;
thou'st have me whipped forlying;
sometimes I'm whipped forholding me peace.
I'd rather be any kind of thingthan a fool.
And yet I would not be thee,nuncle.
Thou hast pared thy wit on bothsides
and left nothing in the middle.
Here comes one of the parings.
How now, daughter?
What makes that frontlet on?
You're too much of late in thefrown.
Thou wast a pretty fellow
when thou hadst no need to carefor her frowning.
Now thou art an O without afigure.
I am better than thou art now.
I am a fool; thou art nothing.
Yes, forsooth, I will hold mepeace.
So your face bids me, though yousay nothing.
Mum, mum, mum.
He that keeps no crust norcrumb,
weary of all, shall want some.
That's a shealed peasecod.
Not only, sir, this yourall-licensed fool,
but other of your insolentretinue
do hourly carp and quarrel,
breaking forth in rank andnot-to-be endured riots.
Sir, I had thought, by makingthis well known to you,
to have found a safe redress butnow grow fearful
by what yourself too late havespoke and done
that you protect their courseand put it on by your allowance,
which, if you should,
the fault would not 'scapecensure,
nor the redresses sleep,
which, in the tender of awholesome weal,
might in their working do youthat offense,
which else were shame that theirnecessity
will call discreet proceeding.
For, you trow, nuncle,
the hedge-sparrow fed the cuckooso long,
it had its head bit off by itsyoung!
So out went the candle, and wewere left darkling.
Are you our daughter?
I would you would make use ofyour good wisdom,
whereof I know you are fraught,
and put away these dispositions
which of late transport you fromwhat you rightly are.
May not the ass know when thecart draws the horse?
Oh, whoops, Jug.
I love thee.
Does any here know me?
This is not Lear.
Does Lear walk thus, speak thus?
Where are his eyes?
Either his notion weakens
or his discernings arelethargied.
Waking? 'Tis not so.
Who is it that will tell me whoI am?
Lear's shadow.
I would learn that, for by themarks
of sovereignty, knowledge, andreason,
I should be false persuaded Ihad daughters.
Which they will make an obedientfather.
Your name, fair gentlewoman?
This admiration, sir,
is much o' the savor of otheryour new pranks.
I do beseech you to understandmy purposes aright.
As you are old and reverend,should be wise.
Here you do keep a hundredknights and squiresó
men so disordered, so deboshedand bold
that this our court, infectedwith their manners,
shows like a riotous inn.
Epicurism and lust makes it morelike a brothel or a tavern
than a graced palace.
The shame itself doth speak forinstant remedy.
Be then desired by her
that else will take the thingshe begs:
a little to disquantity yourtrain
and the remainder that shallstill depend
to be such men as may besortyour age,
which know themselves and you.
Darkness and devils!
Saddle my horses! Call my traintogether!
Degenerate bastard!
I'll not trouble thee.
Yet have I left a daughter.
You strike my people,
and your disordered rabble makeservants of their betters.
Woe, that too late repentsó
O, sir, are you come?
Is it your will?
Speak, sir.
Prepare my horses.
Ingratitude, thou marble-heartedfiend,
more hideous when thou show'stthee in a child
than the sea-monster.
Pray, sir, be patient.
Detested kite!
Thou liest.
My train are men of choice andrarest parts
who all particulars of dutyknow,
and, with the most exact regard,
support the worships of theirname.
O most small fault,
how ugly didst thou in Cordeliashow
which, like an engine,
wrenched my frame of nature fromthe fixed place,
drew from my heart all love, andadded to the gall.
O Lear, Lear, Lear.
Beat at this gate
that let thy folly in and thydear judgment out!
Go, go, my people.
My lord, I am as guiltless as Iam ignorant
of what hath moved you.
It may be so, my lord.
Hear, Nature, hear.
Dear goddess, hear.
Suspend thy purpose if thoudidst intend
to make this creature fruitful.
Into her womb, convey sterility.
Dry up in her the organs ofincrease.
And from her derogate body
never spring a babe to honorher.
If she must teem, create herchild of spleen
that it may live
and be a thwart disnaturedtorment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in herbrow of youth,
with cadent tears fret channelsin her cheeks,
turn all her mother's pains andbenefits
to laughter and contempt
that she may feel how sharperthan a serpent's tooth it is
to have a thankless child.
Away, away!
Now, gods that we adore,wherefore comes this?
Never afflict yourself to knowmore of it,
but let his disposition havethat scope
as dotage gives it.
What, fifty of my followers at aclap within a fortnight?
What's the matter, sir?
I'll tell thee: life and death!
I am ashamed that thou hastpower
to shake my manhood thus,
that these hot tears, whichbreak from me perforce,
should make thee worth them.
Blasts and fogs upon thee!
The untented woundings of afather's curse
pierce every sense about thee.
Old fond eyes, beweep this causeagain,
I'll pluck ye out and cast you,
with the waters that you loose,to temper clay.
It is come to this?
Let it be so.
I have another daughter,
who, I am sure, is kind andcomfortable.
When she shall hear this ofthee,
with her nails, she'll flay thywolvish visage.
Thou shalt find that I'll resumethat shape
which thou dost think I havecast off forever.
Do you mark that, my lord?
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,to the great love I bear you
Pray you, content.
What, Oswald, ho!
You, sir, more knave than fool,after your master.
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear,
tarry, take the fool with thee!
The fox, when one has caughther,
and such a daughter should sureto the slaughter
if my cap would buy a halter!
And so the fool follows after!
This man hath had good counsel:a hundred knights.
'Tis politic and safe
to let him keep at point ahundred knightsó
yes, that, on every dream, eachbuzz, each fancy,
each complaint, dislike,
he may enguard his dotage intheir powers
and hold our lives in mercy?
Oswald, I say!
Well, you may fear too far.
Safer than trust too far.
Let me still take away the harmsI fear,
not fear still to be taken.
I know his heart.
What he hath uttered I have writmy sister.
If she sustain him and hishundred knights
when I have showed theunfitnessó
how now, Oswald?
What, have you writ that letterto my sister?
Aye, madam.
Take you some company, and awayto horse.
Inform her full of my particularfear.
And thereto add such reasons asyour own
as may compact it more.
Get you gone, and hasten yourreturn.
No, no, my lord,
this milky gentleness and courseof yours,
though I condemn not, yet, underpardon,
you are much more attasked forwant of wisdom
than praised for harmfulmildness.
How far your eyes may pierce, Icannot tell.
Striving to be better, oft wemar what's well.
Nay, then.
Oh, well, the event.
Go you before to Gloucester withthese letters.
Acquaint my daughter no furtherwith anything you know
than comes from her demand outof the letter.
If your diligence be not speedy,I shall be there before you.
I will not sleep, my lord, tillI have delivered your letter.
If a man's brains were in hisheels,
were't not in danger of kibes?
Ay, boy.
Then, I prithee, be merry; thywit shall not go slip-shod.
Ha, ha, ha.
Shalt see thy other daughterwill use thee kindly,
for though she's as like this asa crab's like an apple,
yet I can tell what I can tell.
What canst tell, boy?
She will taste as like this as acrab does to a crab.
Canst tell why one's nose stands
in the middle on's face?
No.
To keep his eyes on either sideof his nose,
that what a man cannot smellout,
he may spy into.
I did her wrong.
Canst tell how an oyster makeshis shell?
No!
No, nor I neither!
But I can tell why a snail has ahouse.
Why?
To put his head in,
not to give it away to hisdaughters
and leave his horns without acase.
I shall forget my nature.
So kind a father.
Be my horses ready?
Thy asses are gone about 'em.
The reason why the seven starsare no more than seven
is a pretty reason.
Because they're not eight?
Yes, indeed.
Thou would make a good fool.
To take 't again perforce.
Monster ingratitude.
If thou wert my fool, nuncle,
I'ld have thee beaten for beingold before thy time.
How's that?
Thou shouldst not have been oldtill thou hadst been wise.
O, let me not be mad, not mad.
Sweet heaven, keep me in temper.
I would not be mad.
How now! Are my horses ready?
Ready, my lord.
Come, boy.
She that's a maid now and laughsat my departure
shall not be a maid long unlessthings be cut shorter.